.\" switch-xray.8 - man page for switch-xray
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Ciro Iriarte
.\" Licensed under GPL-3.0-or-later
.\"
.TH SWITCH-XRAY 8 "2026-03-01" "switch-xray 1.0.1" "System Administration Commands"
.
.SH NAME
switch-xray \- switch port diagnostics and documentation via SNMP
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B switch-xray.sh
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.B \-\-switch
.I HOST
.RI [ \-\-switch
.IR HOST .\|.\|.]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B switch-xray
is a diagnostic tool that provides a snapshot of switch port configuration and
cabling via SNMP.
It is the switch-side counterpart to
.BR nic-xray (8),
designed for implementation documentation and ad-hoc troubleshooting.
.PP
For each switch port it displays:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
Port name and description (ifAlias)
.IP \(bu 2
LAG membership (ae/Port-Channel) with member count
.IP \(bu 2
Administrative and operational status (color-coded)
.IP \(bu 2
Negotiated speed (color-coded by tier)
.IP \(bu 2
MTU
.IP \(bu 2
LLDP neighbor system name and remote port
.RE
.PP
When querying multiple switches,
.B cross-switch LAG detection
(ESI-LAG / MCLAG) identifies hosts with LAG members spanning different
switches, common in EVPN/VXLAN IP Fabric and traditional MCLAG deployments.
.PP
Supports multiple output formats:
.BR table " (default, with dynamic column widths),"
.BR CSV ", " JSON ", and"
.B network topology diagrams
(DOT/SVG/PNG).
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
.SS Target
.TP
.BI \-\-switch " HOST"
Switch hostname or IP address to query.
This option can be specified multiple times to query several switches in a
single run.
Required unless
.B SWITCH_XRAY_SWITCHES
is set.
.TP
.BI \-\-platform " PLATFORM"
Force platform detection instead of auto-detecting via sysDescr.0.
Valid values:
.BR junos ", " arista ", " cumulus ", " cisco ", " generic .
.
.SS SNMP Authentication
.TP
.BI \-\-snmp\-version " VER"
SNMP version.
Valid values:
.B 2c
(default) or
.BR 3 .
.TP
.BI \-c " STR" "\fR,\fP \-\-community " STR
SNMPv2c community string.
Required when using SNMP version 2c.
.TP
.BI \-u " USER" "\fR,\fP \-\-snmp\-user " USER
SNMPv3 username.
Required when using SNMP version 3.
.TP
.BI \-l " LVL" "\fR,\fP \-\-sec\-level " LVL
SNMPv3 security level.
Valid values:
.BR noAuthNoPriv ", " authNoPriv ", " authPriv .
.TP
.BI \-a " PROTO" "\fR,\fP \-\-auth\-proto " PROTO
SNMPv3 authentication protocol.
Valid values:
.BR MD5 ", " SHA ", " SHA\-256 ", " SHA\-384 ", " SHA\-512 .
.TP
.BI \-A " PASS" "\fR,\fP \-\-auth\-pass " PASS
SNMPv3 authentication passphrase.
.TP
.BI \-x " PROTO" "\fR,\fP \-\-priv\-proto " PROTO
SNMPv3 privacy protocol.
Valid values:
.BR DES ", " AES ", " AES\-256 .
.TP
.BI \-X " PASS" "\fR,\fP \-\-priv\-pass " PASS
SNMPv3 privacy passphrase.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " FILE"
Path to a configuration file.
If the file does not exist, the program exits with an error.
See
.B CONFIGURATION
below.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " SECS"
SNMP timeout in seconds.
Default: 5.
.TP
.BI \-\-retries " N"
Number of SNMP retries.
Default: 1.
.
.SS Display
.TP
.B \-\-lldp\-detail
Show the LLDP remote system description column.
.TP
.B \-\-vlans
Show PVID/VLAN information columns.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Enable all optional columns (equivalent to
.B \-\-lldp\-detail \-\-vlans
plus the switch model column).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color codes in output.
Useful when piping to a file or pager.
.TP
.BI \-\-filter\-status " TYPE"
Show only ports matching the given status.
Valid values:
.BR up " (operationally up),"
.BR down " (operationally down),"
.BR admin\-down " (administratively disabled)."
.TP
.BI \-\-filter\-port " PATTERN"
Show only ports whose name matches the given glob pattern.
For example,
.B \(dqxe\-0/0/*\(dq
shows only 10G ports on slot 0.
.
.SS Format
.TP
.BI \-s \fR[\fISEP\fR]\fP "\fR,\fP \-\-separator" \fR[\fP=\fISEP\fR]\fP
Add column separators to the table output.
If
.I SEP
is not given, defaults to
.BR | .
The separator argument is optional and must be attached to the short form
without a space (e.g.\&
.BR \-s\(dq;\(dq ).
.TP
.B \-\-group\-switch
Insert visual group separators between switches in multi-switch output.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " FORMAT"
Output format.
Valid values:
.BR table " (default),"
.BR csv ", " json ", " dot ", " svg ", " png .
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B table
\(em human-readable table with dynamic column widths and optional colors.
.IP \(bu 2
.B csv
\(em comma-separated values (use
.B \-s
to change the delimiter).
.IP \(bu 2
.B json
\(em JSON array of objects, one per port.
.IP \(bu 2
.B dot
\(em Graphviz DOT source written to stdout.
.IP \(bu 2
.B svg
\(em renders the DOT graph to SVG (requires
.BR graphviz ).
.IP \(bu 2
.B png
\(em renders the DOT graph to PNG (requires
.BR graphviz ).
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-diagram\-style " STYLE"
Diagram layout style for DOT/SVG/PNG output.
Valid values:
.BR switch " (default),"
.BR network .
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B switch
\(em switch-centric view with switch clusters and port sub-nodes.
.IP \(bu 2
.B network
\(em network-centric view showing the full mesh topology.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-diagram\-out " FILE"
Output file path for SVG or PNG diagrams.
If not specified, a default filename is generated based on the switch name(s).
.
.SS General
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B switch-xray
reads configuration from the following locations, in order of precedence:
.RS 4
.IP 1. 4
Explicit path via
.BI \-\-config " FILE"
.IP 2. 4
.I ~/.switch-xray.conf
.IP 3. 4
.I /etc/switch-xray.conf
.RE
.PP
Only the first matching file is loaded.
CLI arguments always override configuration file values.
.PP
The configuration file uses a simple
.IB key = value
format, one setting per line.
Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.
See
.I switch-xray.conf.example
for all available keys.
.PP
Recognized keys:
.TP
.B switch
Switch hostname or IP (repeatable).
.TP
.B snmp_version
SNMP version (2c or 3).
.TP
.B community
SNMPv2c community string.
.TP
.B snmp_user
SNMPv3 username.
.TP
.B sec_level
SNMPv3 security level.
.TP
.B auth_proto
SNMPv3 auth protocol.
.TP
.B auth_pass
SNMPv3 auth passphrase.
.TP
.B priv_proto
SNMPv3 privacy protocol.
.TP
.B priv_pass
SNMPv3 privacy passphrase.
.TP
.B timeout
SNMP timeout in seconds.
.TP
.B retries
SNMP retries.
.TP
.B platform
Force platform detection.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are recognized.
They override configuration file values but are overridden by CLI arguments.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_SWITCHES
Comma-separated list of switch hostnames or IP addresses.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_COMMUNITY
SNMPv2c community string.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_VERSION
SNMP version
.RB ( 2c
or
.BR 3 ).
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_USER
SNMPv3 username.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_SEC_LEVEL
SNMPv3 security level.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_AUTH_PROTO
SNMPv3 authentication protocol.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_AUTH_PASS
SNMPv3 authentication passphrase.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_PRIV_PROTO
SNMPv3 privacy protocol.
.TP
.B SWITCH_XRAY_PRIV_PASS
SNMPv3 privacy passphrase.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution (including when no matching interfaces are found).
.TP
.B 1
Error: invalid arguments, missing dependencies, unreachable switches,
SNMP authentication failure, or rendering failure.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Query a single switch using SNMPv2c:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch 10.0.0.1 -c public
.EE
.RE
.PP
Query multiple switches:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 --switch sw2 -c public
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use SNMPv3 authentication:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch 10.0.0.1 --snmp-version 3 \\
  -u myuser -l authPriv -a SHA -A authpass -x AES -X privpass
.EE
.RE
.PP
Show all optional columns:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 -c public --all
.EE
.RE
.PP
Filter to only operationally up ports:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 -c public --filter-status up
.EE
.RE
.PP
Filter ports by name (glob pattern):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 -c public --filter-port "xe-0/0/*"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Group output by switch with column separators:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch leaf-01 --switch leaf-02 -c public \\
  --group-switch -s
.EE
.RE
.PP
CSV output with pipe delimiter:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 -c public --output csv -s'|'
.EE
.RE
.PP
JSON output with all fields:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 -c public --output json --all
.EE
.RE
.PP
Generate an SVG topology diagram:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 -c public --output svg
.EE
.RE
.PP
Generate a PNG diagram with custom output path and network style:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --switch sw1 --switch sw2 -c public \\
  --output png --diagram-out net.png --diagram-style network
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use a configuration file:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
switch-xray.sh --config /etc/switch-xray.conf
.EE
.RE
.
.SH SUPPORTED PLATFORMS
Platform detection is automatic via
.BR sysDescr.0 .
Use
.B \-\-platform
to override.
.PP
.TP
.B JunOS (QFX, EX, MX) \fR\(em Primary\fP
xe-*, et-*, ge-*, mge-*, ae*
.TP
.B Arista EOS \fR\(em Supported\fP
Ethernet*, Port-Channel*
.TP
.B Generic (any SNMP device) \fR\(em Fallback\fP
ifType 6 (ethernet) and 161 (LAG)
.PP
New platforms can be added by implementing a
.BI filter_interfaces_ PLATFORM ()
function.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.switch-xray.conf
Per-user configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/switch-xray.conf
System-wide configuration file.
.TP
.I switch-xray.conf.example
Example configuration file distributed with the source.
.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B Required
.BR snmpbulkwalk (1)
or
.BR snmpwalk (1),
and
.BR snmpget (1)
(from the
.B net-snmp
package).
.TP
.B Optional
.BR dot (1)
(from the
.B graphviz
package) \(em required for
.B \-\-output svg
and
.B \-\-output png .
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nic-xray (8),
.BR snmpbulkwalk (1),
.BR snmpwalk (1),
.BR snmpget (1),
.BR dot (1)
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/ciroiriarte/switch-xray/issues
.UE .
.
.SH AUTHORS
.B Ciro Iriarte
.
.SH LICENSE
GNU General Public License v3.0.
See the LICENSE file distributed with the source for details.
